      International Journal of Geographical Information
      Science



      ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tgis20




Developing a multiview spatiotemporal model
based on deep graph neural networks to predict
the travel demand by bus

Tianhong Zhao, Zhengdong Huang, Wei Tu, Filip Biljecki & Long Chen

To cite this article: Tianhong Zhao, Zhengdong Huang, Wei Tu, Filip Biljecki & Long Chen (2023)
Developing a multiview spatiotemporal model based on deep graph neural networks to predict
the travel demand by bus, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 37:7,
1555-1581, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2023.2203218

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2023.2203218




       Published online: 26 Apr 2023.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 1330



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data



       Citing articles: 14 View citing articles




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
2023, VOL. 37, NO. 7, 1555–1581
https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2023.2203218


RESEARCH ARTICLE

Developing a multiview spatiotemporal model based on
deep graph neural networks to predict the travel demand
by bus
Tianhong Zhaoa,b               , Zhengdong Huanga              , Wei Tua   , Filip Biljeckib,c     and
Long Chend
a
  School of Architecture and Urban Planning, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China; bDepartment of
Architecture, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; cDepartment of Real Estate,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; dState Key Laboratory of Management and
Control for Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


    ABSTRACT                                                                       ARTICLE HISTORY
    The accurate prediction of travel demand by bus is crucial for                 Received 29 July 2022
    effective urban mobility demand management. However, most                      Accepted 11 April 2023
    models of travel demand prediction by bus tend to focus on the
    bus’s spatiotemporal dependencies, while ignoring the interactions             KEYWORDS
    between buses and other transportation modes, such as metros                   Graph deep learning;
                                                                                   multiview learning; travel
    and taxis. We propose a Multiview Spatiotemporal Graph Neural                  demand prediction;
    Network (MSTGNN) model to predict short-term travel demand by                  multimodal transportation;
    bus. It emphasizes the ability to capture the interaction dependen-            smart card data
    cies among the travel demand of buses, metros, and taxis. Firstly,
    a multiview graph consisting of bus, metro, and taxi views is con-
    structed, with each view containing both a local and global graph.
    Secondly, a multiview attention-based temporal graph convolution
    module is developed to capture spatiotemporal and cross-view
    interaction dependencies among different transport modes.
    Especially, to address the uneven spatial distributions of features
    in multiview learning, the cross-view spatial feature consistency
    loss is introduced as an auxiliary loss. Finally, we conduct intensive
    experiments using a real-world dataset from Shenzhen, China. The
    results demonstrate that our proposed MSTGNN model performs
    better than the existing models. Ablation experiments validate the
    contributions of various modes of transportation to the improve-
    ment of the model’s performance.




1. Introduction
The buses serve as one of the most crucial modes of transportation since they contrib-
ute to promoting environmental sustainability, offering low-cost and accessible transit,
enhancing social and economic connections, and decreasing traffic congestion (May
2013, McLeod et al. 2017, Sultana et al. 2019). The prediction of travel demand by bus
has become an important issue that allows policymakers and transportation authorities


CONTACT Wei Tu          tuwei@szu.edu.cn
ß 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
1556     T. ZHAO ET AL.


to ensure efficient and effective transportation services. The demand for bus travel is
affected by the macroscopic built environment and the dynamic factors in the trans-
portation system. In the long term, the spatial layout of the built environment pro-
foundly influences the spatiotemporal distribution of citywide travel demand by bus
(McNally 2007, Ma et al. 2018, Qi et al. 2019). Individual characteristics, such as educa-
tional background, income, and family structure, have also been demonstrated to
influence long-term travel behaviors, i.e. travel modes, travel times, and travel frequen-
cies (Recker et al. 1986, Wang et al. 2011a). In contrast, in the short term, competition
and cooperation among buses, metros, and taxis affect the availability of travel
choices, thereby influencing travel demand by bus.
    Recently, advances in information and communication technology (ICT) have
enabled the collection of massive, timely transportation data, allowing us to capture
the dynamic interactions among multiple travel modes. For example, Zhang et al.
(2018b) revealed the interaction patterns of buses and taxis by considering the spatial
distributions of trips and travel distances. They demonstrated that the competition
and cooperation among different transport modes in multimodal trips were spatially
correlated. Chen et al. (2022) unraveled latent transfer patterns between buses and
metros and reported 21 typical patterns. Their results suggested that the transfer from
one mode of travel to another is dynamic across space and time. Wu and Liao (2020)
revealed that extreme weather events significantly affect travel behaviors. In experi-
ments conducted on data from Beijing’s metro system and a survey, they found that
passengers prefer subways or cars to buses and bicycles when the weather is bad.
    We summarize the dynamic interactions among buses, metros, and taxis into two
types, as shown in Figure 1. (1) Global interaction transfer. For example, a commuter




Figure 1. Interactions among the travel demands of buses, metros, and taxis. travel demand by
bus may be influenced by other transportation modes in its neighborhood (local) and those that
are far away (global).
                          INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE    1557


may travel from station Metro B to station Metro A and then transfer to station Bus A.
In this case, the travel demand at bus station Bus A is affected by the global spatial
influence of metro station Metro B. (2) Local interaction transfer. For example, if a rain-
storm occurs, people who board the bus at Bus A may transfer to a taxi service at Taxi
A, as they will not walk to the bus station in the rain (Wu and Liao 2020). From the
travel records, we can observe that the trips of Bus A decrease while those of the
neighboring Taxi A station increase. Therefore, considering multimodal travel would
enable us to better understand and predict travel demand (Ke et al. 2021, Li et al.
2021).
    Essentially, predicting the demand for bus travel is a time series problem. Capturing
the non-linear dependencies of travel demand across space and time is a challenge
(Zheng et al. 2014). In recent years, many different neural network models have been
developed to address this challenge. For instance, graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been used to capture spatial and
temporal dependencies, respectively (Zhang et al. 2017, Ren et al. 2020). Some studies
have developed more complex and powerful neural network models to capture spe-
cific spatiotemporal dependencies; examples include as long short-term memory
(LSTM) (Cui et al. 2020) and graph attention networks (Guo et al. 2019). These models
are generally based on historical demand features; they treat each mode of transporta-
tion as an isolated and independent environment, ignoring its interaction with other
transportation modes. Recently, Liang et al. (2022) proposed a graph-based deep
learning approach for bike sharing demand prediction considering the interactions
among bike sharing, subway riding, and ride hailing. They developed intermodal simi-
larity and difference modules to capture multimodal transportation interaction
dependencies. Their findings demonstrate that graph-based deep learning outper-
forms existing methods. However, designing an effective structure to capture multi-
modal dynamic interactions remains a challenge. A multimodal interaction fusion
model training strategy is also absent.
    To fill these gaps, we propose a new Multiview Spatiotemporal Graph Neural
Network (MSTGNN) model to predict short-term travel bus demand. Unlike previ-
ously developed approaches, the MTGNN model considers the interactions among
different transport modes from both global and local perspectives. Specifically, a
multiview graph with bus, metro, and taxi views is constructed according to spatial
adjacency and mobility among different regions. A multiview attention-based spa-
tiotemporal graph convolution module is designed to capture spatiotemporal and
cross-view interaction dependencies among different transport modes. The cross-
view feature spatial consistency (CVSFC) loss is introduced to overcome the issue
regarding the uneven spatial distributions of multiview features. Intensive experi-
ments are conducted using a real-world bus, metro, and taxi dataset in Shenzhen.
The results demonstrate that the MSTGNN model outperforms the baseline
methods.
    The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related
studies. Section 3 defines the studied problem. Section 4 describes the presented
MSTGNN model. Section 5 reports the experimental results and discusses them.
Finally, Section 6 concludes this study and outlines future work ideas.
1558     T. ZHAO ET AL.


2. Related work
2.1. Multimodal urban mobility
Urban mobility, which includes various travel modes, such as walking, cycling, buses,
and metros, is typically related to the built environment, demographics, and urban
dynamics. (Tu et al. 2017, Yue et al. 2018, Tu et al. 2020, Li et al. 2020b, Zhang et al.
2020b, Gao et al. 2021). As a result, the multimodal demands of different travel types
are highly correlated with each other in the long term. Previous studies depended on
passenger surveys to investigate the interactions between human travel and multi-
modal transportation (Barry et al. 2009, Nassir et al. 2015). These studies aimed to
investigate the impact of passengers’ subjective perceptions and service provisions on
multimodal travel in public transportation systems. Cherry and Townsend (2012) used
more than 300 surveys and developed a satisfaction analysis and ordinal regression
model to analyze the influencing factors of passengers on metro and bus transfers.
The results indicated that safety and the distances between metro exits and bus stops
were the most critical factors that affected transfers. Hernandez and Monzon (2016)
analyzed a transfer satisfaction survey using the principal component analysis method
and discovered that minimizing the required waiting time and increasing transfer sta-
tion comfort are the most important factors that influence the willingness to transfer.
Zhao and Li (2017) investigated the interactions between two modes of transportation
metros and bicycles in Beijing. It was discovered that trip distance is the most influen-
tial element for transfer travel between metro stations and houses or businesses.
Furthermore, income, individual views, and the built environment also substantially
impact transfer.
    With the advancement of ICT, smart cards and GPS data provide comprehensive
spatial and temporal travel information, enabling us to explore the spatial scopes and
temporal dynamics of multimodal transportation interactions (Fang et al. 2012, Siła-
Nowicka et al. 2016, Li et al. 2020a, Zhang et al. 2020b). By combining these big multi-
source transport data, the state-of-the-art methods can finely identify passengers’
transfer behaviors and travel chains in a multimodal transportation system, which acts
as a foundation for evaluating multimodal transportation interactions. Zhao et al.
(2017) provided a method for recognizing transfer behaviors using smart card data
and constructed various frameworks for analyzing the multifactor interactions involved
in multimodal travel, such as built environment associations and spatiotemporal simi-
larity. Tu et al. (2018) explored bus, metro, and taxi ridership; revealed the associations
between multimodal ridership and demographic, land use, and transportation factors;
and compared the similarities and differences among these associations.
    In the short term, the interactions that occur in multimodal transportation are
reflected in the travel mode choices made in a dynamic urban environment (Tao et al.
2018, Zhao et al. 2020). Wu et al. (2022) employed a multivariate generalized Poisson
regression model to investigate the relationships between bus and subway transfer
passenger flows and socioeconomic, built environment, holiday, and weather variables
on different days. They found that the transfer ridership of the metro-to-bus mode sig-
nificantly increased under the high wind, heavy rain, and high-temperature conditions.
Kim (2020) examined the impacts of weather and calendar events on subway and bus
                          INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE   1559


mode choices. They found that bad conditions, including cold weather, increased sub-
way use, and the magnitudes of the influences of different features varied over the
tested periods. In summary, as components of the urban transportation system, buses,
metros, and taxis all affect each other. Capturing their dependencies is quite helpful
for predicting travel demand.


2.2. Travel demand prediction
Travel demand prediction operates based on historical travel information and add-
itional variables (weather, dates, etc.) to predict long-term or short-term travel demand
(Ma et al. 2014, Karnberger and Antoniou 2020, Huang et al. 2021, Liu et al. 2021). The
related methods are mainly divided into two categories: knowledge-driven methods
and data-driven methods. Knowledge-driven approaches are generally used in urban
research and queuing theory; they predict travel demand by understanding the laws
of travel demand and the built environment, as well as by constructing resident
behaviors (Xu et al. 2014, Ma et al. 2018). Despite their strong interpretability, these
methods cannot effectively capture the dynamic changes in travel demand in a com-
plex realistic context. Typical data-driven methods include the moving average (MA)
model and the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model (Ahmed and
Cook 1979, Hamed et al. 1995). These models have high computational efficiency, can
be applied to various fields, and are widely used in transportation prediction.
However, such methods can only capture the linear temporal correlations in travel
demand data; the more complex non-linear space-time correlations cannot be cap-
tured, limiting the prediction performance of such approaches.
    In recent years, deep learning models have achieved great performance in terms of
travel demand prediction because they can capture temporal and spatial dependen-
cies (Miglani and Kumar 2019, Zhao et al. 2020, Kashyap et al. 2022). In terms of tem-
poral dependence, an RNN considers the time series correlations among multiple
input time points, processes the input information from the previous instant, and
retains it in the operation used for the current information; thus, RNNs are widely
used to capture temporal dependencies (Cho et al. 2014, Zaremba et al. 2015). RNN
model variants, such as the LSTM network and gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997, Shu et al. 2022), have been developed to overcome the van-
ishing gradient and overfitting problems and have performed well in transport predic-
tion tasks. In terms of spatial dependence, many studies treat urban space as a
standard grid or a non-European graph structure and employ convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and GCNs to capture spatial dependencies (Ren et al. 2020). For
example, Ren et al. (2020) divided their study area into a regular two-dimensional grid;
captured spatial dependencies through a two-dimensional CNN; used LSTM to capture
the proximity, periodicity, and trend features in time series; and predicted the traffic
flow. Zhao et al. (2020) built a graph based on a road network and proposed a tem-
poral GCN (T-GCN) model, a combination of a GCN and a GRU, to capture the spatio-
temporal characteristics of traffic flows. Many more complex networks have been
proposed to better capture the temporal and spatial dependencies in transport
1560     T. ZHAO ET AL.


prediction tasks, such as graph attention networks (Zheng et al. 2020) and graph
WaveNet (GWNET) (Wu et al. 2019).
   Most deep learning-based travel demand prediction models focus on complex spa-
tiotemporal dependencies (Yu et al. 2018, Guo and Zhang 2020), while the interactions
of multimodal transportation dependencies receive little attention. Few recent studies
have attempted to use a multiview learning approach to fuse multimodal transporta-
tion information to achieve improved model performance. Ke et al. (2021) proposed a
deep multitask multigraph learning approach for predicting the solo and shared ser-
vice modes in ride hailing systems. They constructed neighborhood, distance, and
functionality graphs and proposed a regularized cross-task learning structure to
achieve knowledge sharing between different modes. Liang et al. (2022) proposed a
graph-based deep learning approach for bike sharing demand prediction by consider-
ing the interactions among bike sharing, subway riding, and ride hailing. They devel-
oped intermodal similarity and intermodal difference modules to capture multimodal
transportation interaction dependencies. Their results demonstrated the superior per-
formance of their approach over that of existing methods. However, challenges remain
with regard to designing an efficient structure for capturing multimodal dynamic inter-
actions, and a model training strategy for the fusion of multimodal interaction features
is unavailable. Here, we propose a new MSTGNN model to predict short-term travel
demand. Unlike previously developed approaches, this model considers multimodal
transportation interactions from both local and global transfer perspectives, develop-
ing global and local cross-view multigraph learning structures. Specifically, a CVSFC
loss is presented to overcome the uneven distribution issue exhibited by multiview
features during model training.


3. Problem statement
Here, we provide the basic definitions used in this study.


3.1. Definition 1: Spatial graph
A spatial graph is represented by G ¼ ðV, A, XÞ, where V ¼ v1 , v2 , :::, vN is the set of
nodes, A is a feature matrix with dimensions of N  N, and X is the feature matrix for
the nodes. In this study, each node is a street-level transportation analysis zone (TAZ)
(Zhao et al. 2022), and N is the number of TAZs. If there is an edge that goes from
node i to node j, then Aij ¼ 1; otherwise, Aij ¼ 0. The feature matrix X is defined below.
Multiple graphs can be constructed by considering the different connections between
TAZs, and the detailed graph construction procedure is demonstrated in Section 4.1.


3.2. Definition 2: Feature matrix
A feature matrix refers to the historical travel demands of the three transportation
modes of each node in the spatial graph G. The feature matrix is denoted by X 2
RMFN : At each time step t, the graph G has a dynamic feature matrix Xt 2 RMFN ,
where M represents the number of transportation modes, F represents the length of
                            INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE       1561


the historical time series, and N is the number of TAZs. Xtm represents the travel
demand for all TAZs at time t under transportation mode m.


3.3. Definition 3: Travel demand prediction problem
Given one or more graphs G and its/their feature matrix X ¼ ½Xtn , :::, Xt1 , Xt , the travel
demand prediction problem is to learn a function f that can predict the next k steps of
graph features belonging to transportation mode m, as shown in Equation (1).
                     m                                                         
                             m
                     Xtþ1 , Xtþ2 , :::, Xtþk
                                         m
                                               ¼ f GðsÞ; ½Xtn , :::, Xt1 , Xt             (1)



4. Methodology
This section introduces the proposed MSTGNN model for travel demand prediction. The
schematic structure of the MSTGNN is presented in Figure 2. The MSTGNN model con-
sists of three main components: a multiview graph construction module, a multiview
attention-based temporal GCN (MVATGCN) module, and a cross-view spatial-temporal




Figure 2. The framework of the proposed MSTGNN model.
1562     T. ZHAO ET AL.


feature fusion module. First, multiview graphs (e.g. bus, metro, and taxi graphs) are con-
structed. Each view has local and global graphs, which are built according to the histor-
ical origin-destination records of trips. Then, the multiview graph features are
independently fed into the MVATGCN module to capture both local and global cross-
view dependencies. Finally, the predicted travel demand results are obtained by fusing
the global and local cross-view spatiotemporal dependencies through a parameter
matrix. The details of each module are described below.


4.1. Generating a multiview graph
It is challenging to directly model multimodal travel flow data due to the complex
spatial and temporal dependencies of various transportation modes. Multiview learn-
ing can decompose complex interaction patterns into multiple independent simple
patterns, separately capture the spatiotemporal dependencies of each view, and then
fuse the multiview features (Zhang et al. 2020a, Sun et al. 2022, Wang et al. 2022). On
the one hand, this approach reduces the burden of capturing complex non-linear
dependencies. On the other hand, it makes the resulting model more interpretable.
The foundation of graph-based multiview learning is to build multiple spatiotemporal
graphs. We structure bus, metro, and taxi views according to the different transporta-
tion modes. In each view, we consider two types of spatial relationships among TAZs,
spatial adjacency and mobility, which two graphs can represent. (1) The local graph
GL ¼ ðV, AL , XÞ encodes the spatial adjacency relations. Tobler’s first law of geography
states that ‘everything is related to everything else, but near things are more con-
nected than distant things’ (Tobler 1970). In a transportation system, adjacent TAZs
may share similar travel patterns. Therefore, we construct adjacency relationship
graphs to consider spatial autocorrelations and the adjacency matrix AL can be com-
puted as in Equation 2. (2) The global graph GG ¼ ðV, AG , XÞ encodes the mobility
among TAZs. Intuitively, geographically distant TAZs with strong mobility have higher
travel demand correlations due to transfer. Historical travel demand records provide
information on the mobility among different TAZs, which can be used to build a glo-
bal graph; AG can be calculated as shown in Equation 3, where vij denotes the number
of travel between TAZs i and j and d is a threshold. Here, we set the threshold to the
count of the top 20% of trips entering a TAZ. This means that we construct edges for
each TAZ with other TAZs that have the top 20% of the strongest mobility.
                                   
                                      1, vi and vj are adjacent
                          AL, ij ¼                                                     (2)
                                      0,    otherwise
                                           
                                             1, vij > d
                                  AG, ij ¼                                             (3)
                                             0,  otherwise

    The bus, metro, and taxi views of the graph data models Gbus , Gmetro , and Gtaxi
are constructed for multiview learning, as shown in Equations (4)–(6). Each view con-
tains two types of data graph models: a local graph GL and a global graph GG.
Although the GG have different edges, they share the nodes V, and the travel demand
features X belong to the nodes. The local multiview graphs include Gbus     metro
                                                                       L , GL     , and
GL , and the global multiview graphs include GG , GG , and GG : Finally, the global
  taxi                                         bus  metro       taxi
                           INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE             1563


and local multiview graphs are fed into the MVATGCN module.
                     n           o                                      
            G bus
                  ¼ GL , GG
                       bus   bus
                                   ¼     V, Abus
                                             L   , X bus
                                                          , V, Abus
                                                                G   , X bus
                                                                                                  (4)
                                           n                                             o
        Gmetro ¼ Gmetro
                  L     , Gmetro
                           G           ¼ V, Ametro
                                             L       , X metro , V, Ametro
                                                                         G        , X metro       (5)
                                        n                                         o
               Gtaxi ¼ Gtaxi
                        L    , Gtaxi
                                G      ¼ V, Ataxi
                                               L   , X taxi
                                                              , V, Ataxi
                                                                    G      , X taxi
                                                                                                  (6)



4.2. The MVATGCN
The MVATGCN module captures heterogeneous spatiotemporal and cross-view
dependencies. As shown in Figure 3, it includes a multiview TGCN that stacks four
temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) and GCNs, as well as a cross-view attention
network. The multiview TGCN is used to capture the spatiotemporal dependencies of
the individual transportation views. The cross-view attention network is used to cap-
ture the cross-view dependencies of various transportation modes.

4.2.1. Multiview TGCN
Convolution is an excellent method for aggregating neighborhood information, and it
is commonly used in local feature extraction tasks (Rawat and Wang 2017, Cao et al.
2020). Inspired by previous studies, we use the convolutional-based method to extract
temporal and spatial features. In terms of the temporal aspect, although RNN-based
models have become widespread in time series analysis cases, many challenges
remain regarding the use of recurrent networks for travel prediction, including their
long training time requirements and their difficulty in dealing with long-range sequen-
ces. CNN-based models have the advantages of quick training processes, simple struc-
tures, and no dependency limitations concerning prior stages. As a result, we adopt




Figure 3. The multiview attention-based temporal graph convolution module.
1564      T. ZHAO ET AL.




Figure 4. The dilated causal convolution with a kernel size of 2.

dilated causal convolution structures (Yu and Koltun 2016) as our TCNs to capture the
temporal dependency of each zone.
   As shown in Figure 4, the dilated causal convolution operation, a special case of
standard 1D convolution, slides over inputs by skipping values with a certain step size.
The dilated convolution algorithm varies from the traditional CNN because it has a
wider kernel, which can more effectively learn connections between data at different
time intervals. For each group of view graph data Gv, Xv is the time series feature of
view v, and the dilated causal convolution operation of Xv at step s is represented as:
                                        X
                                        L
                                 X ¼
                                   v
                                              X v ðlÞ  Kðs  l  dÞ                   (7)
                                        l¼1

where X denotes the features obtained after the dilated causal convolution, K 2 RL is
         v

the kernel with a size of L and d is the dilation factor that controls the skipping dis-
tance. When the network is dilated by a factor of 1, it is similar to a CNN, and a kernel
with a dilation factor of 2 has one kernel that skips the input. This structure can obtain
a larger receptive field while the convolution kernel size remains the same. The recep-
tive field of the network can be calculated as r ¼ 2ðn1Þ  L, which means that the r
value of the network grows exponentially with the number of network layers n.
Gating mechanisms have been demonstrated to be effective for controlling the flow
of information through layers in dilated causal convolution networks. We use gated
activation units to further capture temporal dependencies, as shown in Equation (8).
In the equation, Wf and Wg are the learnable convolution filters, X is the input feature,
 denotes an elementwise multiplication operator, rðÞ is a sigmoid function, and b
and c are learnable bias parameters. Finally, the graph feature X_ of each view v after
                                                                    v

temporal convolution is obtained.
                                                               
                        X_ ¼ tanh Wf  X þ b  r Wg  X þ c
                          v              v                   v
                                                                                       (8)

   GCNs have recently become popular for capturing non-Euclidean spatial dependen-
cies (Yu et al. 2018, Zhang et al. 2020c). GCNs can be roughly categorized into two
                          INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE    1565


groups: spectral graph convolution and spatial graph convolution approaches. Spectral
graph convolution transfers signals from the graph domain to the Fourier domain
through a graph Laplacian. This paper uses the spectral-based graph convolution
method to implement the GCN. The input is the graph G_ 2 ðV, Av , X_ Þ obtained after
                                                             v         v

temporal convolution. X€ denotes the feature matrix after utilizing the GCN. Generally,
                         v

a graph convolution can be expressed as X€ ¼ HðLÞX_ , i.e. the multiplication of a fea-
                                              v          v

ture matrix X_ with a kernel H. Here, L ¼ I  D1=2 AD1=2 is the symmetric normalized
               v

Laplacian matrix of G, I is an identity matrix, and D denotes the diagonal degree
matrix of A. However, this normalization approach is time-consuming, with a complex-
ity of oðn2 Þ: We use Chebyshev polynomial approximation to simplify the normaliza-
tion task instead (Defferrard et al. 2017); formally, the graph convolution can then be
rewritten as:
                                              X
                                              K
                              X€ ¼ HðLÞX_          wk Tk ð^LÞX_
                                v        v                       v
                                                                                        (9)
                                              k¼0

where ^L ¼ 2L=kmax  I denotes the scaled Laplacian matrix. kmax is the largest eigen-
value of L, and wk is the Chebyshev coefficient. The Chebyshev polynomials are recur-
sively defined as Tk ðxÞ ¼ 2xTk1 ðxÞ  Tk2 ðxÞ, with T0 ðxÞ ¼ 1 and T1 ðxÞ ¼ x: K is the
number of consecutive filtering operations or convolutional layers in a model, where
node information utilizes the information derived from the K—1st-order neighborhood
of the central node in a convolution operation.

4.2.2. Cross-view attention network
The mutual influences of different transportation views are diverse; for example, dur-
ing morning rush hour, the demands for metros and buses are strongly correlated. An
attention mechanism is capable of adaptively assigning weights between different
views (Vaswani et al. 2017, Guo et al. 2019). We design a cross-view attention module
to learn the contribution of each transportation mode to the target zone.
                                                                   
                                           €
                   a ¼ softmax U concat X , X
                                             bus
                                                 € metro
                                                          €
                                                         ,X
                                                            taxi
                                                                   Wþb            (10)
where concatðÞ concatenates the three views (bus, metro, and taxi view) features
obtained after the temporal and spatial convolutional networks X€ 2 RCin N into a
                                                                        v

high-dimensional vector. W 2 RNCout is a learnable parameter matrix that maps the
connected high-dimensional features to a new feature space, Cout is the output chan-
nel of the high-dimensional features, and Cout ¼ 3  Cin : U 2 RCout Cout is a learnable
parameter matrix, and b is a trainable bias. The resulting weight matrix a 2 RCout Cout is
the learned attention weight. Finally, the features of the three views are concatenated
and multiplied by the attention weight matrix to obtain the cross-view dependency
features X~ ; this process is formulated as follows:
                                                                  
                               X~ ¼ concat X€ , X€       , X€
                                             bus   metro      taxi
                                                                     a               (11)

  The cross-view attention network has the ability to assign different attention
weights to the various transportation views. Intuitively, as shown in Figure 5, the GCN
aggregates the local and global information on buses, metros, and taxis from a spatial
1566     T. ZHAO ET AL.




Figure 5. The process of sharing messages between different spaces and multiple views through a
GCN and a cross-view attention network.

perspective. The three transportation mode signals are then fed into the attention
module, where the bus, metro, and taxi signals are aggregated for each zone and the
weights of various transportation modes are allocated by using the attention
mechanism.


4.3. Cross-view spatial-temporal feature fusion
Through the MVATGCN module, we obtain local and global cross-view dependency
features, which are denoted as X~ l and X~ g , respectively. We propose utilizing a fusion
layer to fuse the local and global cross-view spatial-temporal features. Previous multi-
view transportation prediction tasks found that various views can have different
degrees of influence on the final prediction results (Sun et al. 2022). Inspired by this,
the two types of features can be combined using a parametric matrix-based fusion
method:
                                   Y^ ¼ Wl  X~ l þ Wg  X~ g                             (12)
where Wl and Wg are the learnable parameters, and  represents the Hadamard
product.


4.4. Loss functions
To achieve effective model training and address the uneven spatial distribution of
multiview features, two kinds of losses are proposed to constrain the network training
process, i.e. major and auxiliary losses. The major loss is the mean squared error loss
LL2 : The auxiliary loss function is the spatial feature distribution consistency loss LSC :
The overall loss is formulated as follows:
                                     L ¼ k1 LL2 þ k2 LSC                                  (13)
where k1 and k2 control the relative importance levels of the two losses. The best val-
ues for k1 and k2 are found by changing the value of k1 =k2 from 0.01 to 100 while
keeping the other parameters fixed. Specifically, LL2 calculates the gaps between the
                          INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE    1567


elements in the predicted travel demand by bus Y^ and the ground truth Y. It can be
expressed as follows:
                                       1X M X N                  2
                               LL2 ¼              Y^ t, i  Yt, i                      (14)
                                       k t¼0 i¼0

    The multimodal travel demand is not uniformly distributed across space. For
example, metro travel demand is only observed in limited TAZs, and the taxi travel
demand in the central urban area is significantly higher than that in the suburbs.
However, the spatial feature distribution imbalance may be considered data noise. To
allow the GCN to better learn the interactions of features between different TAZs, we
design an auxiliary loss to ensure the consistency of the spatial feature intensity distri-
bution across views, thus avoiding the effect of data noise. In this way, the CVSFC loss
is computed by the cosine distance as:
                                                0                  1
                                    X                  € bus
                                                             € v
                          Lsc ¼                 @1  X  X         A                  (15)
                                                    kX€ k  kX€ k
                                                       bus       v
                                v2ðmetro, taxiÞ

where X€ represents the feature of the transportation view v calculated by the TCN
         v

and GCN.


5. Results and discussion
5.1. Datasets
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the presented MSTGNN, experiments are con-
ducted on multimodal datasets from Shenzhen, China. The collected travel demand
data for buses, metros, and taxis extend from 1 December 2018 to 31 December 2018.
These data come from the Shenzhen Transportation Bureau; specifically, the dataset
has the following three parts.

   Bus: The data of travel demand by bus come from Shenzhen smart card and GPS
   data. The data cleaning procedures involve adjusting the swipe system time and
   GPS time and removing some GPS abnormalities. By employing the technique sug-
   gested by Wang et al. (2011b), we can estimate the origin stop, destination stop,
   and travel time of each trip using GPS and smart card data. Finally, 3.1 million
   bus trips are recorded every day, encompassing 7875 bus stops.
   Metro: The metro travel demand data are collected from the same smart card data,
   which includes the times and station names of each trip when stations are entered
   and exited. A person’s metro trip information, including their boarding/alighting
   location and time, may be retrieved directly from the smart card database.
   Anomalies related to trip times and metro stations are removed from the records
   as part of the data cleaning procedure. The 290 metro stations are distributed
   across 156 TAZs, and 2.2 million metro trip records are created daily.
   Taxi: The taxi GPS dataset includes record times, taxi locations, and service statuses
   (0 for idle, 1 for service). We delete GPS records with abnormal passenger load sta-
   tuses and those that are not in Shenzhen. Consecutive taxi GPS data with statuses
1568      T. ZHAO ET AL.


   changing from 0 to 1 indicate that a taxi trip has started. Utilizing the method, taxi
   trips are estimated (Tu et al. 2018). Approximately 0.78 million taxi pick-up and
   drop-off locations and time records per day are created from 20 thousand taxis.

   Following Zhao et al. (2022), 1386 TAZs are generated using a Voronoi diagram
based on the main roads in Shenzhen, which includes the primary, secondary, and
trunk types of the OpenStreetMap (OSM) road classification. This method has the
advantage that bus stops on both sides of the same route are grouped together, and
the predicted results are better for bus schedules. We measure the travel demands for
different modes of transportation in each TAZ with a 5-min time resolution. This new
multimodal transportation travel demand dataset (SZ) is available.


5.2. Preliminary analysis
Before formally presenting the prediction experiments and analytical results, it is
necessary to conduct a preliminary analysis to validate the cross-view spatiotemporal
dependencies. We use Spearman correlation analysis to evaluate various dependen-
cies. Inspired by Li et al. (2017), the total travel demand for each transportation mode
in each region is used as a spatial correlation variable. The sum of all TAZ travel
demands every 5 min for each transportation mode is used as a temporal correlation
variable. As shown in Table 1, from the spatial perspective, the spatial correlation coef-
ficients of bus-metro, bus-taxi, and metro-taxi travel demands are 0.39, 0.55, and 0.53,
respectively. This suggests that the travel demands for buses and taxis have the stron-
gest spatial correlation, while those of buses and metros have the weakest correlation
due to the lack of metro stations in many TAZs. From a temporal perspective, the cor-
relation coefficient of bus-metro travel is 0.97, which is higher than their spatial correl-
ation. The bus-taxi and metro-taxi travel demands have correlation coefficients of 0.31
and 0.41, respectively. This shows that the temporal correlations between taxi travel
demand and other transportation modes are relatively weak. Specifically, Figure 6
shows the temporal distributions of the travel demands for the three modes of trans-
portation. The temporal distributions of bus and metro travel demands are similar,
with obvious morning and evening peaks. The travel demand for buses is higher dur-
ing the morning peak than the metro demand, but the two demands are almost equal
during the evening peak. The peak demand for taxis occurs in the early hours (22:00–
24:00), and no significant demand fluctuation occurs throughout the day (8:00–20:00).
Furthermore, significant differences are observed between the characteristics of taxi
and bus operations. Taxis operate throughout the day. However, during the nighttime
hours of 0:00–6:00 a.m. and 22:00–24:00, bus services are reduced or discontinued,

Table 1. Spatial and temporal correlation coefficients.
                           Spatial correlation                    Temporal correlation
                Bus              Metro           Taxi     Bus            Metro           Taxi
Bus             1                0.39            0.55     1              0.97            0.31
Metro           0.39             1               0.53     0.97           1               0.41
Taxi            0.55             0.53            1        0.31           0.41            1
                            INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE   1569




Figure 6. Temporal distributions of the three transportation modes.




Figure 7. RMSE and epoch runtime changes were obtained with different parameters on the SZ
dataset.


and the demand for bus travel is not observed. To reduce the effect of data noise, we
reduce the demand for taxis to zero for these two periods in the dataset.


5.3. Hyperparameter selection
Parameter tuning is essential for obtaining a deep learning model with optimal per-
formance (Ke et al. 2017, Zhang et al. 2018a). The MSTGNN model contains three
important hyperparameters: Kt, Ks, and Dstg. Kt is the size of the temporal convolution
kernel, Ks is the size of the spatial convolution kernel, and Dstg is the number of spatio-
temporal convolution layers. The optimal model parameter combination is generally
found using a control variable approach (Cheng et al. 2020). To test Kt, Ks, and Dstg are
fixed to 3 and 4, respectively, and Kt varies from 2 to 5. Ks varies from 2 to 5 when Kt
and Dstg are fixed to 3 and 4, respectively. Correspondingly, Dstg varies from 1 to 5
when Kt and Ks are fixed to 3. We use the root mean square error (RMSE) and the run-
ning time required for one epoch as evaluation metrics, and Figure 7 presents the
obtained results. The RMSE decreases and then increases with increasing Ks and Kt val-
ues. The proposed model performs best when Ks =Kt ¼ 3; thus, we set Ks =Kt to 3. Even
1570     T. ZHAO ET AL.


though the performance tends to be better as Dstg rises, the training time also signifi-
cantly increases. Finally, we set Dstg to 4.


5.4. Experimental setup
5.4.1. Evaluation metrics
The ground truth is the travel demand by bus within each TAZ. yi denotes the ground
truth of the i-th TAZ. ^y i is the corresponding predicted value, and y is the average of
all yi. We use three evaluation metrics, including the mean absolute error (MAE), RMSE,
and coefficient of determination (R2), which are defined as Equations (16)–(18),
respectively. Here, S denotes the set of all TAZs.

                                         1X S
                                   MAE ¼         jyi  ^y i j                         (16)
                                         S i¼1
                                       vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                       u S
                                       u1 X
                                RMSE ¼ t           ðyi  ^y i Þ2                      (17)
                                          S i¼1
                                         PS
                                                 ðyi  ^y i Þ2
                                 R ¼ 1  Pi¼1
                                  2
                                                                                      (18)
                                            i¼1 ðyi  
                                            S
                                                            y Þ2


5.4.2. Baselines
We compare the MSTGNN model with several baseline methods, including a statistical
method (ARIMA), a machine learning method (SVR), and several deep learning meth-
ods (LSTM, STGCN, and T-GCN). In particular, we use the improved T-GCN model to
test the advantages of our proposed model in fusing the three modes of transporta-
tion. The six baseline methods are described briefly below.

   ARIMA: This is a statistical method that is widely used for time series prediction
   (Box and Pierce 1970).
   SVR: This is a machine learning-based regression approach to modeling the rela-
   tionship between future demand and historical time series (Lau and Wu 2008).
   Here, we use a radial basis function (RBF) as the kernel, and the penalty parameter
   C is set to 1.
   LSTM: This is an RNN-based deep learning model that captures complex relation-
   ships and long-term dependencies in time series data, and it has attracted exten-
   sive attention in traffic prediction tasks (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Here,
   we set the number of hidden layers toas 3 and the hidden state size to 128.
   Spatiotemporal GCN (STGCN): This is a deep learning model that captures tem-
   poral and spatial dependencies by employing gated CNNs and spectral-based
   GCNs, respectively (Yu et al. 2018). Here, we set the numbers of channels in the
   three layers of the ST-Conv block to 64, 32, and 128 each, and both the graph and
   temporal convolution kernel sizes are set to 3.
   GWNET: This is a spatiotemporal graph learning approach based on a self-learned
   adjacency matrix for capturing complex spatial dependencies via node embedding
                                   INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE    1571


    (Wu et al. 2019). Here, we adopt a self-adaptive adjacency matrix and a graph con-
    volution layer with a diffusion step size of 2 in the model.
    T-GCN*: This is one of the most widely used transport prediction models, which is
    combined with a GCN and a GRU (Zhao et al. 2020). Here, the main structure of
    the T-GCN model remains unchanged. We use the concatenation operation to inte-
    grate the features of the three transport modes instead of inputting one transport
    mode as input. We set the number of hidden units to 100 in our experiments.

5.4.3. Network training
We aggregate the multiview transportation demand data into 5-min intervals and apply z
score normalization to each mode to align the different datasets. The input historical time
step is m ¼ 12, and the prediction step is n ¼ 6, as this setting utilizes the historical
observed travel demand of the previous hour to predict the demand for the following half
hour. Seventy percent of the data are used for model training, 10% are employed for valid-
ation, and 20% are applied for model testing. The adaptive moment estimation (Adam)
optimizer is used to train the networks with a learning rate of 0.001 that decays by a factor
of 0.8 after 50 epochs. The training batch size is 64. According to the hyperparameter opti-
mization results obtained in Section 5.3, the temporal convolution kernel is set to 3, the
spatial convolution kernel is set to 3, the number of convolutional layers is set to 4, and
the number of convolution channels is set to 32. The output channel size of the multiview
TGCN module is set to 96. Fixed random seeds are used for each experiment. We use
LibCity (Wang et al. 2021) to implement the baseline model and tune the parameters based
on the performance of the validation set. All experiments are implemented on an NVIDIA
DGX A100 server with 512 GB of RAM and eight NVIDIA A100 tensor core GPUs (40 GB).


5.5. Results and analysis
5.5.1. Overall results
The prediction performance of the proposed MSTGNN model is reported in Table 2
and Figure 8. Overall, the model’s three metrics (the MAE, RMSE, and R2) are 1.216,
2.909, and 0.965, respectively, when the time granularity is 15 min. The prediction
accuracy decreases as the time granularity increases; for example, the MAE increases
from 0.807 to 1.283 when the time granularity is increased from 5 to 30 min. For visu-
alization analysis, we choose the prediction results obtained for TAZ No. 617 at various
time granularities. Figures 8(a–c) show the true travel demand by bus and predicted

Table 2. Performance comparison among different models.
                           5 min                          15 min                       30 min
                                         2                            2
Model          MAE         RMSE          R      MAE       RMSE        R      MAE       RMSE       R2
ARIMA          1.235       3.277       0.958    2.006     5.557     0.876    2.847     8.285    0.722
SVR            1.256       4.304       0.925    1.660     4.956     0.900    1.982     5.963    0.854
LSTM           1.124       3.506       0.950    1.375     3.698     0.944    1.641     3.752    0.925
STGCN          1.040       2.447       0.975    1.369     3.314     0.955    1.438     3.504    0.949
GWNET          0.897       2.173       0.983    1.327     3.147     0.963    1.460     3.697    0.942
T-GCN         0.882       2.019       0.983    1.284     3.011     0.964    1.398     3.503    0.951
MSTGNN         0.807       1.919       0.985    1.216     2.909     0.965    1.283     3.080    0.961
Bold values denote the best results.
1572     T. ZHAO ET AL.




Figure 8. The ground truths and prediction results, as well as an error analysis of the MSTGNN
model for TAZ No. 617. (a) 5-min time granularity; (b) 15-min time granularity; (c) 30-min time
granularity.


values for time granularities of 5, 15, and 30 min in a day, respectively, as well as
green bars indicating their absolute errors. The larger residual occurs between 7:00–
9:00 and 17:00–19:00 due to the strong fluctuating travel demand during this period,
which is consistent with the results obtained by Guo and Zhang (2020).


5.5.2. Comparison with the baselines
The performances of various models are summarized in Table 2. Taking a time granu-
larity of 15 min as an example, compared to those of the best baseline (T-GCN), the
MAE and RMSE of the proposed model are reduced by 5.59 and 3.51%, respectively.
This suggests that the MSTGNN outperforms these baseline methods. The ARIMA per-
forms worse than the other baseline models, with MAE and RMSE values of 2.006 and
5.557, respectively, demonstrating the limitations of traditional statistical models in
obtaining non-linear spatiotemporal relationships. SVR performs better than the
ARIMA model, with MAE and RMSE values of 1.66 and 4.956, respectively, due to its
ability to handle complex temporal features; however, it performs worse than the
deep learning models. LSTM, a deep learning model, can capture non-linear temporal
dependencies and outperform traditional statistical and machine learning models; its
MAE and RMSE reach 1.375 and 3.698, respectively. However, among the deep learn-
ing models, LSTM performs worst, demonstrating the importance of considering spa-
tial dependencies in travel demand prediction. The MAEs of the STGCN and GWNET
are 1.369 and 1.327, respectively; GWNET has a 3.17% advantage. Although GWNET
and the STGCN both consider spatial dependencies, the adaptive spatial adjacency
matrix used in GWNET enables it to outperform the STGCN, demonstrating that the
utilized graph structure significantly impacts the prediction results. T-GCN combines
the three transportation modes via a simple connection approach, and the MAE
improves by 3.35% over that of GWNET. Our model outperforms all other baselines
because it considers multiple spatial relationships and the cross-view dependencies of
various transportation modes. In addition, we evaluate the prediction results obtained
for workdays and weekends, and our proposed MSTGNN model still performs best.
The R2 values produced for workdays and weekends are 0.968 and 0.957, respectively.
The R2 value obtained for weekends is lower than that of workdays. As there are few
commuters on weekends, bus travel is highly random and difficult to predict on
weekends.
                                  INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE    1573


5.5.3. Contributions of different modes of transportation
We construct three simplified versions of the MSTGNN to quantify the contributions of
various modes of transportation.

    MSTGNN-B: This model only accepts bus transportation data, and the rest of its
    architecture is consistent with that of the MSTGNN model. The cross-view attention
    module is removed because only one mode of transportation is considered here.
    MSTGNN-BM: The structure of this model is consistent with that of the MSTGNN
    model, and both local and global cross-view interaction views are considered, but
    the input data are limited to the combination of bus and metro data.
    MSTGNN-BT: Similar to the MSTGNN-BT model, the bus and taxi transportation
    mode data are combined and fed into this model.

    Table 3 summarizes the performance achieved by the MSTGNN model variants with
different modes of transportation. The MSTGNN performs best when the bus, metro,
and taxi information are considered, while MSTGNN-B performs poorly when only the
bus view is considered. Utilizing the 15-min time granularity as an example, the MAE
and RMSE of the MSTGNN model are improved by 10.06 and 11.51%, respectively,
over those of MSTGNN-B. The difference in performance between the MSTGNN-BM
and MSTGNN-BT models is minor, especially when the time granularity is 5 min, and
MSTGNN-BM performs better than MSTGNN-BT when the time granularities are 15 and
30 min. From the analysis in Section 5.2, it is clear that the spatial correlation between
taxis and buses is stronger. However, the temporal correlation between metros and
buses is stronger. Combining the results, it can be suggested that the temporal corre-
lations among multiple modules can play a more important role in achieving model
performance improvements than spatial correlations.
    Figure 9 illustrates the spatial MAE distributions of the MSTGNN-B, MSTGNN-BM,
and MSTGNN-BT models to investigate the contributions of metros and taxis. Darker
TAZs have larger MAEs. MSTGNN-BM and MSTGNN-BT, which incorporate additional

Table 3. Performance comparison was performed while considering different views.
                              5 min                       15 min                      30 min
                                          2                           2
Model             MAE         RMSE        R      MAE      RMSE        R      MAE      RMSE       R2
MSTGNN            0.807       1.919     0.985    1.216    2.909     0.965    1.283    3.080    0.961
MSTGNN-B          0.857       2.019     0.983    1.347    3.249     0.957    1.464    3.561    0.948
MSTGNN-BM         0.803       1.922     0.985    1.233    2.947     0.965    1.319    3.117    0.960
MSTGNN-BT         0.807       1.917     0.985    1.246    2.983     0.964    1.324    3.166    0.959
Bold values denote the best results.




Figure 9. Spatial MAE distributions. (a) MSTGNN-B, (b) MSTGNN-BM, and (c) MSTGNN-BT.
1574        T. ZHAO ET AL.


transportation modes, achieve improved prediction accuracies for most of the TAZs
compared to MSTGNN-B. When considering metros, the MAE of MSTGNN-BM increases
significantly in the TAZs along the metro lines and in the downtown area. Taking
highlighted area › as an example, MSTGNN-BM reduces the MAEs of the TAZs belong-
ing to and around the metro station. MSTGNN-BT can make some contribution to the
prediction performance in the suburbs where there are no metro stations (such as
highlighted area ‹).

5.5.4. Contributions of local and global cross-view dependencies
Multimodal transportation interactions are mainly reflected in the local neighborhood
transfer and the global commuter transfer processes. We develop two components in
the MSTGNN model to capture local and global cross-view dependencies. To explore
the contributions of the global and local cross-view dependencies to the model, we
construct two simplified models to conduct ablation experiments.

    MSTGNN-G: The architecture is the same as that of the MSTGNN, but the adjacency
    graph network is abandoned, and the local MVATGCN module is removed.
    MSTGNN-L: The connection graph network and global MVATGCN module are
    removed, similar to MSTGNN-G, and only the local influences of the three views are
    considered.

    Table 4 compares the performance achieved when considering global or local
cross-view dependencies in the MSTGNN model. Overall, the MSTGNN, which considers
both global and local cross-view dependencies, performs best. Specifically, although
the MAE of the MSTGNN is greater than those of the other two models when the time
granularity is set to 5 min, the RMSE and R2 are superior to those of the other models.
When the time granularity levels are 15 and 30 min, the MSTGNN significantly outper-
forms the other two models in terms of all three metrics. This suggests that the use of
multiple graph structures can yield improved model performance by considering more
comprehensive spatial relationships. Among the simplified models, MSTGNN-L is
slightly better than the MSTGNN-G model considering global cross-view dependencies.
This suggests that global dependencies contribute less than local dependencies to the
travel demand prediction performance.

5.5.5. Evaluation of the proposed losses
The travel demands for different transportation modes are unevenly distributed across
space. In multiview learning, if the features of different views significantly differ, they
may be considered data noise, thus reducing the resulting model performance (Cao

Table 4. Performance comparison between local and global cross-view dependencies.
                             5 min                     15 min                   30 min
Model            MAE         RMSE        R2    MAE     RMSE       R2    MAE     RMSE       R2
MSTGNN           0.807       1.919     0.985   1.216   2.909    0.965   1.283   3.080    0.961
MSTGNN-L         0.804       1.963     0.984   1.293   3.197    0.958   1.388   3.408    0.952
MSTGNN-G         0.791       1.967     0.984   1.318   3.241    0.957   1.435   3.427    0.952
Bold values denote the best results.
                                  INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE       1575


et al. 2020). We propose the CVSFC loss to constrain the training process of the net-
work. The auxiliary loss function may cope with missing and abnormal data for a par-
ticular view. It has the ability to learn features of other views via feature consistency
rules. Specifically, we design noisy datasets based on the SZ dataset. They are tested
in two scenarios to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed CVSFC loss. (1) SZ:
This is the real-world dataset from Shenzhen. (2) SZ-Missing: Based on the Shenzhen
dataset, the bus data are kept constant, and 20% of the areas are randomly selected
for metro and taxi data removal. On these two datasets, we examine the predictive
performance achieved with and without the CVSFC loss. The loss weights k1 and k2
are set to 1 and 1, respectively.
    The results are shown in Table 5, overall, the results obtained on these two datasets
show that the proposed CVSFC loss can improve the robustness of the model with a
very limited negative impact and even a slight performance improvement. Specifically,
on the SZ dataset, although the accuracy of the model without the CVSFC loss is
slightly higher than that with the CVSFC loss at a time granularity of 5 min, the per-
formance achieved with the CVSFC loss improves at other time granularities, with MAE
improvements of 3.45 and 3.82%, respectively. On the SZ-Missing dataset, the CVSFC
loss enables MAE improvements of 2.34, 3.90, and 1.83% for the three time granular-
ities. The CVSFC loss can improve the model performance at all time granularities
when the feature distribution inhomogeneities are artificially increased. These results
demonstrate that the proposed CVSFC loss is efficient for training our model and
beneficial for addressing the uneven distribution of multiview features and enhancing
the model’s robustness.

5.5.6. Multiview interaction analysis
To intuitively investigate the roles of the attention mechanisms in our model and the
dynamic interactions of buses, metros, and taxis, we plot an attention matrix. The
model contains local and global multiview attention matrices. We select three different
periods of the day from the two matrices for analysis purposes: morning rush hour
(7:00–9:00), evening rush hour (17:00–19:00), and off-rush hour (14:00–17:00). We cal-
culate the average attention weight across all channels of each view to obtain a
3  three attention matrix. Each row and column of the attention matrix can be div-
ided into three parts, representing the bus, metro, and taxi views, as the input features
are concatenated from the three transport views. As shown in Equation 11, the atten-
tion-weighted feature X~ ¼ concatðX€ , X€       , X€ Þ  a:
                                     bus  metro     taxi

   As shown in Figure 10, in the attention matrix, the weights of the columns repre-
sent each transportation mode’s contribution to the feature X~ : The weights of the

Table 5. The results of loss performance comparisons are conducted in different scenarios.
                                       5 min                    15 min                   30 min
                                                    2                      2
Dataset           Loss        MAE      RMSE     R       MAE     RMSE      R      MAE     RMSE      R2
SZ             LL2           0.805     1.904   0.985    1.258   2.943    0.965   1.332   3.097    0.961
               LL2 þ Lsc     0.807     1.919   0.985    1.216   2.909    0.965   1.283   3.080    0.961
SZ-missing     LL2           0.832     1.946   0.985    1.279   3.009    0.963   1.333   3.133    0.960
               LL2 þ Lsc     0.813     1.924   0.985    1.231   2.947    0.965   1.309   3.117    0.960
Bold values denote the best results.
1576     T. ZHAO ET AL.




Figure 10. Global and local attention maps are produced at various periods throughout the day.

rows indicate how a certain transportation mode is affected. For the local attention
map, overall, buses play a significant role in feature X~ , with metros making the weak-
est contribution. The contributions of buses, metros, and taxis vary during different
periods. During the morning rush hour, metros are more important than taxis, while
during the evening rush hour, taxis are more critical than metros; the two contribu-
tions are similar during off-rush hours. For the global attention map, buses have the
most significant impact on these features. The contribution of buses is most obvious
during off-rush periods, but there are also substantial contributions from metros and
taxis during the morning and evening rush hours. When comparing the local and glo-
bal attention maps, the local features appear to be more influenced by buses. At the
same time, the other modes (i.e. metros and taxis) also play important roles in the glo-
bal features.


6. Conclusions
This study presents an MSTGNN model that integrates bus, metro, and taxi informa-
tion to predict travel demand by bus. The TCN and GCN layers are stacked to capture
the temporal and spatial dependencies of each transportation mode, and an attention
mechanism is developed to capture the cross-view interaction dependencies. The pro-
posed model is evaluated on a real-world dataset from Shenzhen, which includes bus,
metro, and taxi travel records. Experiments show that the MSTGNN model outperforms
many state-of-the-art baselines according to the RMSE, MAE, and R2 metrics. The pro-
posed model reduces the MAE and RMSE by 5.59 and 3.51%, respectively. Further ana-
lysis of MSTGNN’s attention mechanism demonstrates its good interpretability for
understanding the interactions between various transport modes. With the develop-
ment of smart cities, it is possible to collect a large amount of real-time data on vari-
ous transport modes, including shared bicycles, walking, and even private cars. The
novel model to capture the interaction dependencies between different modes of
transportation can maximize the value of multisource big data.
                             INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE       1577


   The proposed model can be further improved in the following ways. First, several
other factors that influence travel demand, including the built environment, weather
conditions, emergencies, etc., can be further incorporated (Qi et al. 2019, Guo and
Zhang 2020). This research focused on the interactions among different transportation
modes in multimodal travel cases to achieve more accurate travel demand prediction
based on historical travel demand data. In future studies, multisource data can be
examined for data fusion to further improve the prediction performance and robust-
ness of the model. Second, our study was conducted only at the spatial scale of TAZs.
The interactions among multiple transportation modes at various spatial resolutions
may be worthy of exploration in future studies.


Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the editors Prof. May Yuan and Prof. Christophe Claramunt, and
the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments to improve the quality of the article.
We gratefully acknowledge the Shenzhen Institute of Beidou Applied Technology for providing
the raw data. We thank the members of the NUS Urban Analytics Lab for the discussions.


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).


Funding
This study is supported and funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
42071357, 42071360, and 42001393); Key Project of Natural Science Foundation of Shenzhen
(No. JCYJ20220818100200001); the Basic Research Program of Shenzhen Science and
Technology Innovation Committee (No. JCYJ20220530152817039); KartoBit Research Network
(No. KRN2202GK); Guangdong Science and Technology Strategic Innovation Fund (the
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Joint Laboratory Program, No. 2020B1212030009).


Notes on contributors
Tianhong Zhao is a Ph.D. candidate at the Department of Urban Informatics, School of
Architecture and Urban Planning, Shenzhen University. His research interests include graph
neural networks and spatiotemporal big data analysis.
Zhengdong Huang is a Professor at the Department of Urban Informatics, School of Architecture
and Urban Planning, Shenzhen University. He received the Ph.D. degree in human geography
from Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, in 2003. His research interests include GIS and
urban traffic, transportation, and environment; urban spatial analysis; smart city.
Wei Tu is an Associate Professor at the Department of Urban Informatics, School of Architecture
and Urban Planning, Shenzhen University. He received the Ph.D. degree in photogrammetry and
remote sensing from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2013. His research interests focus on
urban informatics, human activity and mobility, and space-time GIS.
Filip Biljecki is an Assistant Professor at the National University of Singapore and the principal
investigator of the NUS Urban Analytics Lab. He holds a Ph.D. in 3D GIS from the Delft
University of Technology, Netherlands, in 2017. His research interests include 3D city modelling,
GeoAI, and geographic data science.
1578      T. ZHAO ET AL.



Long Chen is currently a Professor at the State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for
Complex Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received the Ph.D.
degree in signal and information processing from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2013. His
research interests are autonomous driving, robotics, and artificial intelligence.


ORCID
Tianhong Zhao         http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9290-2049
Zhengdong Huang           http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7264-4567
Wei Tu       http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0255-4037
Filip Biljecki    http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6229-7749
Long Chen        http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4925-0572


Data and codes availability statement
The data and codes that support the findings of this study are available at figshare.com with
the following link: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.20394165.


References
Ahmed, M.S., and Cook, A.R., 1979. Analysis of freeway traffic time-series data by using Box-
  Jenkins techniques. Transportation Research Record, 722, 1–9.
Barry, J.J., Freimer, R., and Slavin, H., 2009. Use of entry-only automatic fare collection data to
  estimate linked transit trips in New York City. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
  Transportation Research Board, 2112 (1), 53–61.
Box, G.E., and Pierce, D.A., 1970. Distribution of residual autocorrelations in autoregressive-inte-
  grated moving average time series models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 65
  (332), 1509–1526.
Cao, R., et al., 2020. Deep learning-based remote and social sensing data fusion for urban region
  function recognition. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 163, 82–97.
Chen, E., et al., 2022. Unraveling latent transfer patterns between metro and bus from large-
  scale smart card data. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 23 (4), 3351–
  3365.
Cheng, S., Peng, P., and Lu, F., 2020. A lightweight ensemble spatiotemporal interpolation model
  for geospatial data. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 34 (9), 1849–
  1872.
Cherry, T., and Townsend, C., 2012. Assessment of potential improvements to metro–bus trans-
  fers in Bangkok, Thailand. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
  Research Board, 2276 (1), 116–122.
Cho, K., et al., 2014. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical
  machine translation. arXiv:1406.1078.
Cui, Z., et al., 2020. Traffic graph convolutional recurrent neural network: A deep learning frame-
  work for network-scale traffic learning and forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
  Transportation Systems, 21 (11), 4883–4894.
Defferrard, M., Bresson, X., and Vandergheynst, P., 2017. Convolutional neural networks on
  graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. arXiv:1606.09375.
Fang, Z., et al., 2012. Spatiotemporal analysis of critical transportation links based on time geo-
  graphic concepts: a case study of critical bridges in Wuhan, China. Journal of Transport
  Geography, 23, 44–59.
Gao, F., et al., 2021. Understanding the modifiable areal unit problem in dockless bike sharing
  usage and exploring the interactive effects of built environment factors. International Journal
  of Geographical Information Science, 35 (9), 1905–1925.
                              INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE          1579


Guo, G., and Zhang, T., 2020. A residual spatio-temporal architecture for travel demand forecast-
    ing. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 115, 102639.
Guo, S., et al., 2019. Attention based spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic
    flow forecasting. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 922–929.
Hamed, M.M., Al-Masaeid, H.R., and Said, Z.M.B., 1995. Short-term prediction of traffic volume in
    urban arterials. Journal of Transportation Engineering, 121 (3), 249–254.
Hernandez, S., and Monzon, A., 2016. Key factors for defining an efficient urban transport inter-
    change: users’ perceptions. Cities, 50, 158–167.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9 (8),
    1735–1780.
Huang, L., et al., 2021. Temporal hierarchical graph attention network for traffic prediction. ACM
    Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 12 (6), 1–21.
Karnberger, S. and Antoniou, C., 2020. Network–wide prediction of public transportation rider-
    ship using spatio–temporal link–level information. Journal of Transport Geography, 82, 102549.
Kashyap, A.A., et al., 2022. Traffic flow prediction models–a review of deep learning techniques.
    Cogent Engineering, 9 (1), 2010510.
Ke, J., et al., 2021. Joint predictions of multi-modal ride-hailing demands: a deep multi-task
    multi-graph learning-based approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
    127, 103063.
Ke, J., et al., 2017. Short-term forecasting of passenger demand under on-demand ride services:
    A spatio-temporal deep learning approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
    Technologies, 85, 591–608.
Kim, K., 2020. Effects of weather and calendar events on mode-choice behaviors for public trans-
    portation. Journal of Transportation Engineering, Part A: Systems, 146 (7), 04020056.
Lau, K., and Wu, Q., 2008. Local prediction of non-linear time series using support vector regres-
    sion. Pattern Recognition, 41 (5), 1539–1547.
Li, C., et al., 2021. A multi-task memory network with knowledge adaptation for multimodal
    demand forecasting. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 131, 103352.
Li, W., Batty, M., and Goodchild, M.F., 2020a. Real-time GIS for smart cities. International Journal
    of Geographical Information Science, 34 (2), 311–324.
Li, W., et al., 2020b. Understanding intra-urban human mobility through an exploratory spatio-
    temporal analysis of bike-sharing trajectories. International Journal of Geographical Information
    Science, 34 (12), 2451–2474.
Li, X., et al., 2017. Revealing spatial variation and correlation of urban travels from big trajectory
    data. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
    Information Sciences, XLII-2/W7, 53–57.
Liang, Y., Huang, G., and Zhao, Z., 2022. Bike sharing demand prediction based on knowledge
    sharing across modes: a graph-based deep learning approach. arXiv:2203.10961.
Liu, Y., et al., 2021. Automatic feature engineering for bus passenger flow prediction based on
    modular convolutional neural network. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
    22 (4), 2349–2358.
Ma, X., et al., 2018. A geographically and temporally weighted regression model to explore the
    spatiotemporal influence of built environment on transit ridership. Computers, Environment
    and Urban Systems, 70, 113–124.
Ma, Z., et al., 2014. Predicting short-term bus passenger demand using a pattern hybrid
    approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 39, 148–163.
May, A.D., 2013. Urban transport and sustainability: The key challenges. International Journal of
    Sustainable Transportation, 7 (3), 170–185.
McLeod, S., Scheurer, J., and Curtis, C., 2017. Urban public transport: planning principles and
    emerging practice. Journal of Planning Literature, 32 (3), 223–239.
McNally, M.G., 2007. The four-step model. In: D.A. Hensher and K.J. Button, eds. Handbook of
    transport modelling, Volume 1. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing, 35–53.
Miglani, A., and Kumar, N., 2019. Deep learning models for traffic flow prediction in autonomous
    vehicles: a review, solutions, and challenges. Vehicular Communications, 20, 100184.
1580      T. ZHAO ET AL.


Nassir, N., Hickman, M., and Ma, Z.L., 2015. Activity detection and transfer identification for pub-
   lic transit fare card data. Transportation, 42 (4), 683–705.
Qi, G., et al., 2019. Analysis and prediction of regional mobility patterns of bus travellers using
   smart card data and points of interest data. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
   Systems, 20 (4), 1197–1214.
Rawat, W., and Wang, Z., 2017. Deep convolutional neural networks for image classification: a
   comprehensive review. Neural Computation, 29 (9), 2352–2449.
Recker, W.W., McNally, M.G., and Root, G.S., 1986. A model of complex travel behavior: part
   I–theoretical development. Transportation Research Part A: General, 20 (4), 307–318.
Ren, Y., et al., 2020. A hybrid integrated deep learning model for the prediction of citywide spa-
   tio-temporal flow volumes. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 34 (4),
   802–823.
Shu, W., Cai, K., and Xiong, N.N., 2022. A short-term traffic flow prediction model based on an
   improved gate recurrent unit neural network. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
   Systems, 23 (9), 16654–16665.
Siła-Nowicka, K., et al., 2016. Analysis of human mobility patterns from GPS trajectories and con-
   textual information. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 30 (5), 881–906.
Sultana, S., Salon, D., and Kuby, M., 2019. Transportation sustainability in the urban context: a
   comprehensive review. Urban Geography, 40 (3), 279–308.
Sun, J., et al., 2022. Predicting citywide crowd flows in irregular regions using multi-view graph
   convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34 (5), 2348–
   2359.
Tao, S., et al., 2018. To travel or not to travel: ‘weather’ is the question modelling the effect of
   local weather conditions on bus ridership. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
   Technologies, 86, 147–167.
Tobler, W.R., 1970. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region. Economic
   Geography, 46, 234–240.
Tu, W., et al., 2017. Coupling mobile phone and social media data: a new approach to under-
   standing urban functions and diurnal patterns. International Journal of Geographical
   Information Science, 31 (12), 2331–2358.
Tu, W., et al., 2018. Spatial variations in urban public ridership derived from GPS trajectories and
   smart card data. Journal of Transport Geography, 69, 45–57.
Tu, W., et al., 2020. Portraying the spatial dynamics of urban vibrancy using multisource urban
   big data. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 80, 101428.
Vaswani, A., et al., 2017. Attention is all you need. arXiv:1706.03762.
Wang, D., Chai, Y., and Li, F., 2011a. Built environment diversities and activity–travel behaviour
   variations in Beijing, China. Journal of Transport Geography, 19 (6), 1173–1186.
Wang, J., et al., 2021. Libcity: An open library for traffic prediction. In: Proceedings of the 29th
   international conference on advances in geographic information systems, 145–148.
Wang, P., et al., 2022. A multi-view bidirectional spatiotemporal graph network for urban traffic
   flow imputation. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 36 (6), 1231–1257.
Wang, W., Attanucci, J.P., and Wilson, N.H., 2011b. Bus passenger origin-destination estimation
   and related analyses using automated data collection systems. Journal of Public
   Transportation, 14 (4), 131–150.
Wu, J., and Liao, H., 2020. Weather, travel mode choice, and impacts on subway ridership in
   Beijing. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 135, 264–279.
Wu, P., et al., 2022. How determinants affect transfer ridership between metro and bus systems:
   a multivariate generalized Poisson regression analysis method. Sustainability, 14 (15), 9666.
Wu, Z., et al., 2019. Graph wavenet for deep spatial-temporal graph modeling. arXiv:1906.00121.
Xu, X., et al., 2014. Analysis of subway station capacity with the use of queueing theory.
   Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 38, 28–43.
Yu, B., Yin, H., and Zhu, Z., 2018. Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks: a deep learning
   framework for traffic forecasting. In: Proceedings of the 27th international joint conference on
   artificial intelligence, 3634–3640.
                             INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE          1581


Yu, F., and Koltun, V., 2016. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. arXiv:
  1511.07122.
Yue, M., et al., 2018. Understanding the interplay between bus, metro, and cab ridership dynam-
  ics in Shenzhen, China. Transactions in GIS, 22 (3), 855–871.
Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., and Vinyals, O., 2015. Recurrent neural network regularization. arXiv:
  1409.2329.
Zhang, J., et al., 2020a. Multi-graph convolutional network for short-term passenger flow fore-
  casting in urban rail transit. IET Intelligent Transport Systems, 14 (10), 1210–1217.
Zhang, J., Zheng, Y., and Qi, D., 2017. Deep spatio-temporal residual networks for citywide
  crowd flows prediction. arXiv:1610.00081.
Zhang, J., et al., 2018a. Predicting citywide crowd flows using deep spatio-temporal residual net-
  works. Artificial Intelligence, 259, 147–166.
Zhang, T., et al., 2020b. Identifying primary public transit corridors using multi-source big transit
  data. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 34 (6), 1137–1161.
Zhang, X., et al., 2018b. Do different datasets tell the same story about urban mobility—a com-
  parative study of public transit and taxi usage. Journal of Transport Geography, 70, 78–90.
Zhang, Y., et al., 2020c. A novel residual graph convolution deep learning model for short-term
  network-based traffic forecasting. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 34
  (5), 969–995.
Zhao, D., et al., 2017. Isolating high-priority metro and feeder bus transfers using smart card
  data. Transportation, 44 (6), 1535–1554.
Zhao, L., et al., 2020. T-GCN: a temporal graph convolutional network for traffic prediction. IEEE
  Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 21 (9), 3848–3858.
Zhao, P., and Li, S., 2017. Bicycle-metro integration in a growing city: the determinants of cycling
  as a transfer mode in metro station areas in Beijing. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
  Practice, 99, 46–60.
Zhao, T., et al., 2022. Coupling graph deep learning and spatial-temporal influence of built envir-
  onment for short-term bus travel demand prediction. Computers, Environment and Urban
  Systems, 94, 101776.
Zhao, X., et al., 2020. Prediction and behavioral analysis of travel mode choice: a comparison of
  machine learning and logit models. Travel Behaviour and Society, 20, 22–35.
Zheng, C., et al., 2020. GMAN: a graph multi-attention network for traffic prediction. In:
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 1234–1241.
Zheng, Y., et al., 2014. Urban computing: concepts, methodologies, and applications. ACM
  Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 5 (3), 1–55.
